Hello. How are you?
Kia ora. I'm great, thank you. How are you?
Kia ora. I'm well, thank you. Look, I think just we have done this very quickly for
the other committees, and I think we should just introduce ourselves
quickly for those who might be online, but also those in the
room. I'm Dana Cooper Patrick. I am the MP for East Coast, and
I'm chairing this subcommittee today.
And we'll go-
Jamie Arbock, list MP in New Zealand First.
And I'm Tom Rutherford. I'm a National MP and the MP for Bay of Plenty.
Mm. Kia ora. Maria Menol Kapakingi, MP for
Maori Tai Tokera. Kia ora.
Kia ora. Kia ora. Louise Jane Prime, Labor list MP, spokesperson for
children and social development and employment. Great.
So,
do we have Helen? Are you Helen?
Yes.
That's the one.
Helen from the
Disability Care Partners. So you have five minutes to
introduce your
submission and speak to us. And maybe if you can leave a minute or so for questions
at the end is good. Otherwise, we'll
go from there. Yeah?
Excellent. Thank you.
You go when you're ready.
Tena koutou katoa. Thank you, Chair and members of the committee.
My name is Helen Lomas. I am the founder of Disability Care Partners, a
Wellington-based disability support and navigation service that has grown
from one client to more than 50 in eight months.
This growth is a measure of unmet need.
I sit here as both a caregiver with two disabled
family members and a provider still working hands-on with tangata
whaikaha and their whanau every week.
I was supposed to be here with a colleague.
However, she is the sole caregiver to two disabled adult children, and as
such, is at home caring for them. She is in her 70s.
This represents the exact reality this bill
in its current state fails to address,
the reliance on aging, unsupported caregivers.
I sit with Josie Parker, support worker for Disability Care Partners, who stepped
in at last minute.
I want to start with something New Zealand should be proud of.
We didn't just sign the UN Convention on the Rights of People with
Disabilities, we chaired the committee, helped write it,
and ratified it in 2008 without reservation.
To be clear, we oppose this bill in its current form, not
the intent, but the content, or lack thereof.
Our central concern is Clause 8, the families first principle.
Natural supports are vital to an effective support framework and the support
plans that we create every day. However, they are not and
cannot be used as a substitute for professional paid support.
Support that is person-centered, provided by professionals in
collaboration with natural supports honors the convention.
Support that is legislated without the appropriate comprehension
and consultation does not. We need to ensure
adequate clarity and protections are in place.
Without them, they will ultimately end up costing the system significantly
more.
We met Maya and her son Kai in December 2025.
We had been asking their NASC for a review for months.
Maya, a solo parent, told the system repeatedly,
"We have no natural support. I need help."
The limited support we have been able to get was nowhere near enough to
support a solo mum with a very high and complex needs child.
In April, after months of crying out for help, Maya attempted
suicide.
She was failed by a system that assumed natural supports existed where there
were not.
Oranga Tamariki weren't equipped to help.
Despite referrals, reports of concerns, and multiple phone calls to the
0800 number myself, it took three days to get any
support from them. I've finally advocated hard enough,
and the stars have aligned, and funding has come through.
Maya and Kai are starting to do better, not because natural
supports appeared, but because professional support in
collaboration with natural supports work.
In terms of cost, we are spending four times more than we would have had we been
able to provide support sooner.
You simply cannot build a system on the assumption that natural supports exist
when they don't. Parents, cousins, aunties, uncles, sisters, brothers,
neighbors, friends, teachers, and grandparents are not a substitute for
professional support. As the minister herself said last night, this bill is not
about restricting people's funding or access.
This bill is about putting the foundation blocks in place to
strengthen DSS. As such, it is our opinion that this
vital bill cannot and should not be rushed.
We are talking about real risk to human lives.
That deserves real consultation with the people who are wearing
that risk.
Maya and Kai's story proves that families first
principle is not just administrative, it is
a direct contributor to crisis.
This is why our recommendations are not merely tweaks but
essential safeguards.
My submission makes five recommendations.
Amend or remove Clause 8
so the availability of family, whanau, or community support can never be
treated as a prerequisite for or a substitute
for funded disability support. Require
an independent assessment of the bill's consistency with the
convention.
Halt the bill's progress until genuine consultation
with disabled people, whanau, and providers have taken place,
as the convention requires.
Invest in formal supports that enable rangatahi and disabled adults
to move into supported living and supported decision-making,
rather than legislating their dependence on aging parents.
And properly recognize resource family carers meaningfully.
The right law builds capacity and honors the commitment we
made in 2008. The wrong one undermines everything
New Zealand has advocated for on the global stage.
I welcome your questions.
Thank you very much. Probably got time for one question, if
someone has one. Or I might ask you about the NASC
assessment process in this. And
I know a little bit about the NASC assessment, so you don't need to tell me how-
Excellent
... frustrating it can be. But do you think that
is part of the frustration with this
system?
So we had the NASC assessment roll out in April, I believe.
And we were told at the time it would take three to four weeks.
I have another family with a very high needs son who is
non-verbal and has considerable behavioral problems.
They've engaged in every single process they can,
yet the new assessment system is still taking three months, I was told
last week, for that support to come through.
This is a family who their son is over five, so technically meets one
of the criteria, and we were told last year, "You can't have any supports for
anyone under five." We all did it. We all understood.
We all pulled together. And now this year, we were told
this new tool's in place. Right? And then now it's
taking three months. But it's not just about that, it's about the wider
ramifications on all of this. There's a serious impact to the
families. And the two parents of this particular family are
both working.
Right.
They can't complete their jobs anymore.
There's already been a significant impact on the WINZ system.
Oh, wow.
So it's having knock-on effects and costing our entire system, which is just
throwing more money.
Right.
It's not as simple as throwing money at us.
Yes. It's been a problem for many years, and it seems it's still that way.
So thank you. Look, I want to thank you very much for coming and bringing
your-
Thank you
... friend with you, but also for your well-thought-through submission.
Thank you.
Kia ora, Helen.
Thanks. We're going to move on to the
Motor Neurone Disease New Zealand via Zoom, I believe.
Yes.
Mark.
Oh, this is the noisiest thing, isn't it?
Hello, Mark.
Yeah.
Kia ora. I'm Dana. I'm the chair of the committee today.
We have you here with us for five minutes, so I will ask you
to
give us your submission, and maybe there'll be time for a question or two at the
end.
Sure. Thank you. I don't want to repeat a whole range of things that I know you've
already heard.
Motor neurone disease is an appalling disease that-
Can you turn it up a little bit, please?
... affects a small community.
Can you hear me okay?
I'm just asking them to turn you up a little bit, please.
Sure.
That's okay.
We
provide service support and advocacy for 400-odd New Zealanders who
suffer from this motor neurone disease,
which is a terminal disability. Our community that we
support exists at the fringes of the disability community, and
their disability is going to kill them, and it's going to kill them pretty quickly
as well.
Roughly half of people with MND die at about two
years from diagnosis, and a good 80% are gone within three
years. So the responsibility of disability
support for the under 65s particularly, which is about
35% to 40% of our client group,
is to be as responsive as possible to a disability that is
atypical. And our submission relates largely to that,
acknowledging the needs of the government to manage its risk around employment
status of family carers. But also somewhat challenging the
assumptions, like the previous speaker, that family carers can pick up the
slack or start with picking up the slack
when a disability that changes so fast as
MND
provides no ability to do that. So our
approach to this, our submission, is around the need for moving
away from broad-brush policies which don't serve anybody
any good.
They're okay at the
fat end or the fat middle of the bell curve, if you like, but they don't
supply the right responses to people who exist at the
fringes. And when you exist at the fringe and your disability is
terminal, the requirement for service
responsiveness and fast turnaround of outcomes and the
appropriate delivery of care at the point of need,
relative to the person's needs and not the policy's needs, is hugely
important. So I'm here today to speak to that as
a niche member of the disability sector, if you like.
We do talk in our submission also around
wanting to be a part of the next steps around design because of what I've just said
around the nature of broad-brush being
a challenge. I'll give you an example.
When it comes to equipment, and this is not speaking about equipment, the needs
assessment situation for people with a terminal disease like MND,
often told that they can't get what they need because they're going to die within
two to three years. Now, that's a broad-brush policy that does not work with
this
group of people, as small as it is, and is an appalling
process to be a part of. That sometimes happens around carer hours, and we often
see that funded carer hours are not adjusted fast enough
to
deliver
against the needs of a person whose needs are changing very, very
quickly.
Yeah.
So our submission is along those lines, wanting to be a part of that process,
acknowledging the needs of government to manage
cost risk. But also wanting to point out that We do need to know the
cost of things, but we also need to know the value.
So, that's what we're here to submit.
Very happy to take questions.
Thank you, Mark. Just wanted to ask you a question about in your
submission, you talked about the means testing by regulation in
Clause 11, which is one of the clauses that we are getting feedback is
causing some concern. And
in the clause, it lists the criteria under subsection
two,
which talks about
how these things would be assessed, including income-based criteria,
asset-based criteria. So is that the main concern for you in
terms of the-
Yes, it is. Well, and particularly with, because this is under 65 as
well, so most
family members will be working, and if you require a family member like a spouse to
take care of someone with a rapidly changing terminal disability,
they're often unable to work, and that affects dramatically
the overall status of the family. So they sometimes meet the means
testing by a perverse mechanism that also costs them a career long-term
once their partner has died. And so they struggle then to enter the workforce
or have other economic disabilities forced upon them because of
the system requiring them to step into a space.
So it-
Okay
... it's a two-way street.
And do you know if these criteria are used already in assessments?
I think there are elements of that, particularly related to equipment
and housing modifications. There are limits there, and that's really goes into the
over 65s as well.
But we see that as a challenge where people are-- It comes down to
the return on investment, I guess, and when you've got someone who is going to die
within two to three years-
Mm
... the system looks at them and says, "Well, we can't help you." But
perversely, we also get people who want to apply for assisted dying and can't get
that because they aren't going to die fast enough.
Yep.
So,
it's a challenging situation and our approach
in our submission is to just speak to the differences that exist
within the disability community, where
wider broad brush policies just don't work for those who really exist at the
fringes.
Look, we've come to our time, sadly.
But thank you very much for your thoughtful submission and raising those points
very clearly.
Appreciate the opportunity. Thank you.
Thank you.
We're done with the next speaker, but Alex Martin.
Okay, so we're going to skip Aotearoa Disability
Law, go to Alex Martin
online.
Kia ora, Alex.
Can you hear me okay?
Yes, can hear you fine. You have five minutes with the committee to
talk to us about your submission, which you can take as read, but and
maybe perhaps leave time for a question at the end if you can.
Otherwise-
Right
... we're in your hands.
Ka pai. Thank you. Kia ora koutou katoa.
Ko Alex toku ingoa.
Firstly, a brief correction to my written submission where I think I may have
written "issues with UNDRIP." I meant
UNCRPD. I did-
Okay
... submit them rather quickly,
given time constraints. So I apologize for any errors.
Yeah.
Moving to my oral submission, though.
While I agree that a legislative framework for disability support
services is overdue,
I do not believe that this bill is a genuine attempt to provide an effective
framework for disabled people or their family carers.
I oppose this bill, and I recommend it be withdrawn in its entirety and replaced
with legislation developed in meaningful consultation with those it
affects.
My perspective is informed by both my experience as the sister of a
disabled person and my tertiary qualifications in politics and
law.
Rather than focusing solely on the committee-specific questions, which I will touch
on,
I would primarily like to introduce my brother, Nick.
Nick is 24 years old and has Smith-Magenis Syndrome.
I don't expect the committee to be aware of this disability, as he is one of
two people that we know of in New Zealand with this condition.
The deletion of a small piece of chromosome 17 means that for the rest
of his life, he is entirely dependent on disability support services,
primarily the care of my parents. His disability affects
his development, behavior, emotions,
speech, sleep, and physical health.
He has epilepsy and has had spent time in both Starship and
ICU.
I want to be clear,
Nick is the best part of my life.
Because of him, I am responsible,
I am empathetic, I am caring, and I am a strong
advocate.
Our sister, a teacher, talks to her students about the
Nick effect, the idea that understanding difference and
practicing empathy shapes how we treat others.
I believe the minister and her government would benefit from attending one of her
classes because this bill does not serve disabled
people or their carers.
I've numerous concerns with the bill, and I recommend, firstly, removing sections
113F and G,
including an independent mechanism to challenge unfair decisions,
requiring MSD to monitor situations where family carers providing
substantially more care than funded,
replacing Clause 10 with a structured settlement process for affected
claimants, and retaining employment as an option for family
carers, which is consistent with health in ACC settings.
But my primary concern
is Section 8 (2) .
I do not need legislation to tell me that the responsibility for my
brother rests with my parents, with my siblings,
with my community, or with me
I already know that. I live that, and I will
always live that.
The reality is that caring for a disabled family member can be a burden.
It brings stress, anxiety, and responsibilities that I
am often not equipped to carry.
Yet I carry them anyway, without question, and with unconditional
love,
as does every member of my family.
My family has rarely
Oops.
Sorry. We've just lost you momentarily.
Hmm.
She's-
My father
work here.
Alex, if you can-- Oh, there you are.
Hello.
Hi, you're back.
Maybe if-
Hello, can you hear me?
Yeah, we can hear you, but I was just-
Okay
... I was just going to suggest if it's easier for you to turn your video off, that
might give you a bit more oomph in the sound system.
Oh, sorry then.
Oh.
3G has disappeared.
No,
it's gone.
She's still unable to put the camera on.
Okay. Can
you hear us?
Can you hear me?
Yes. Yes, I can. Keep going. Right, keep talking. Please just repeat- Okay ...
the last paragraph you were- Yes
... speaking to.
Okay.
My family has rarely asked for help.
Yeah.
My father changed careers so he could work
us and become Nick's full-time carer.
Work that he is not paid for but does because
he loves his family.
My mother works full-time as a teacher and spends countless additional hours
marking, supporting students, and attending extracurriculars.
When she's not working, she is caring for Nick.
As remarkable as my parents are, they cannot do everything.
Like many siblings of disabled people, I have taken on responsibilities from
a young age.
My parents have done their best to protect me and my brother.
We're sacrificing our own lives and futures, but that is not
always possible. I have greater uncertainty over my
future under Section 8 (2) .
I would also like to acknowledge Humphreys and Fleming, and the family carers who
have navigated a difficult system to secure recognition of their rights.
While I am pleased the government has chosen to legislate in response to a court
decision rather than preempt one, its response is wholly
inadequate and prevents other family carers from pursuing their live claims.
But that's the goal, right? This bill is not about supporting disabled
peoples and their carers. It's about fiscal protection.
This government says it values and rewards hard work, yet its policy
choices suggest otherwise.
Family carers are criticized for taking respite or holidays while
continuing to provide the care that saves the state significant
expense.
We work while exhausted and stressed so that the state does not have to.
And when consecutive governments fail to address these issues, families are
forced into lengthy and complex legal processes simply to
secure fair treatment. The bill's explanatory note
states that the Crown does not have unlimited funding and must make
choices. That is true. The Crown does have
choices, and my submission is that it should choose to
support our most vulnerable people and the people who support them.
This bill does not do that. I'm happy to take any questions with
any time remaining.
Thank you so much.
We're actually over time, sadly. But I do want to
thank you, and thank you for everything you do and your family, for your brother.
The Nick effect.
And we will remember the Nick effect as we work through
the rest of the submissions and the hearings. So thank you for your time.
Well done.
Thank you.
And okay, we now have Gretchen Good
online.
Hello.
Hello, Gretchen.
And hello.
Hello.
We have five minutes with you.
Thank you.
Your submission is read. We have read it.
Okay.
But there's five minutes, so if you want us to ask questions,
which is up to you how you use that time, but please do
go on. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Hello, committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today.
I'm here as a disabled person, as an associate professor in disability
and rehabilitation studies, and most importantly, I'm speaking as a mom to
Leo and Tiffany,
New Zealand-born children with Down syndrome.
I have their permission to talk to you about them today. I oppose this bill.
My central concern is that this bill shifts responsibility for disability
support away from the community and onto families, creating
insecurity about whether disabled people will keep receiving the support they need
to live safe, dignified, ordinary lives.
So what changes do I want? First, remove any provisions that
shift responsibility onto families and informal carers.
Keep disability support a shared, rights-based social
responsibility.
Second, remove any pathway toward increased income or asset testing.
Disability supports aren't optional.
They're essential for safety and communication, participation in daily
life. Means testing punishes families for working,
saving, and planning for our children's futures.
Third, ensure there is real long-term certainty for families
planning lifelong care and guardianship.
My husband and I have long-term guardianship plans for Leo and Tiffany
involving trusted friends after we die.
That only works if guardianship remains an act of love,
not a source of financial risk.
Administrative certainty is not the same as security.
Disabled people need stable, guaranteed support, not
just clear rules on paper. Finally, disabled people and
families must be meaningfully included in decision-making through
genuine consultation and co-design with accessible processes
and enough time to participate.
So your question two is what's my biggest concern.
My biggest concern is that this bill reframes disability support
as something families should absorb.
If that happens, families like mine could be pushed into poverty,
reduced employment, and depleted savings just so we can access
essential support. That's not efficiency.
That's just cost-shifting.
Leo and Tiffany were adopted, and I ask you, committee, think
about who will adopt, foster, or take on guardianship
for children like Leo and Tiffany if carers fear lifelong
financial risk. This bill risks reinforcing the idea
that disabled people are a cost to be managed rather than
citizens whose participation enriches our communities.
Leo is 17. He is vision and hearing impaired,
non-verbal, and has Down syndrome.
He volunteers, works on farms, performs on his ukulele.
He swims competitively, and he is a charming boyfriend.
Wow.
He is a contributing citizen living an ordinary
life because we have supports. Tiffany is 15.
She has Down syndrome, ADHD, autism, and epilepsy.
She is fierce, clever, and determined, and she can
outsmart any of the locks in our house.
She dances, plays piano, gets into trouble at school,
and she has the making of a leader, and she might sit in one of your chairs one
day.
Yeah.
She needs close supervision and support to stay safe.
My husband and I provide full-time care and love to the point of
exhaustion.
For 17 years, I have averaged about three hours of sleep per night.
Oh.
Love is not enough. Sometimes we need another pair of hands to keep our
children safe, get them out into the community, and keep them
thriving, and to keep ourselves in work.
So what's my solution? Pause this bill.
Redesign it with disabled people, families, and the disability community.
Build on what already works, enabling good lives.
It was piloted in our region, and it worked really well for our family.
It gave us safety, flexibility, dignity, and autonomy, and it's a
proven model. And align any legislation with the UN
Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities.
My children and all disabled people belong in our communities, not in
institutions or segregated care.
Mm.
New Zealand has spent decades moving toward inclusion.
This bill risks moving us backward.
I don't want my children to live in institutional care or away from each
other, and this bill could lead to that.
In closing, I am frightened about what this bill could mean for my children's
future.
For years, we've given our children love, care, advocacy, everything we
have. We do that willingly, but we don't do it alone.
It's only possible because this community shares that
responsibility. If that changes, families like mine
inherit not just more work and care,
but a lot more fear and anxiety. I ask you to think carefully
about what families like mine already do every day.
We toilet, dress, feed, supervise, protect, and love our children,
and whether that can be sustained
without support. Um, we're trusting you to do the right thing and
start over again with this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Gretchen. I have one quick question from Maria Minow.
Thank you. Gretchen Calder, uh, this might seem like a strange question, but I want
to put it 'cause I think it's relevant.
Do you ever feel like you can cease what you're doing
as a loving mum?
Do you ever feel like you can-
Oh, no. That will never-- No.
Right.
No.
Um, yes. No, that will never come to an end.
But we would like our children to live normal adult lives in flat
with friends or love-- or partners, um,
or spouses, um,
with- without, um,
them being in our home. Maybe living more independently with support.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you, Gretchen. Look, what a remarkable family you are and,
um, and a wonderful human being. So thank you so much for coming and
sharing your story with us today. I really do appreciate it.
Thank you.
Can we get Alex? We
don't have Alex? No. Oh, okay. Is Alex not coming
at all, or might turn up?
I don't think she is. Okay. I don't think she All right.
Um, so we now have Joanne from the Kapiti Disability
Advisory Group. Joanne, um, has a hearing disability.
She is presenting on the next two, um,
submissions. Um, she has a, uh, she's a lip
reader. Yes?
Yes.
Yes. So, uh, please speak slowly if you're going to
ask a question so she can, uh, communicate with us.
Um,
welcome.
Thank you.
You have five minutes.
Yep.
Uh, and then if there's time for a question, we will do that at the end.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak today.
You'll probably get sick of that saying by the end of the session.
My name is Joanne Dakin, and I'm speaking today as chair on behalf of the Kapiti
Coast District, uh, Council's Disability Advisory Group.
Um, I also did a personal submission.
I am multiply disabled myself, and my husband and I have our autistic
adult son and an autistic grandson living with us.
We are a multi-generational household.
The advisory group feels this bill was rushed in order to provide
unnecessary legislative framework, and as a result, it lacked
genuine consultation with disabled people or their representative
organizations before it was presented in the House, which was
a clear breach of Article 4.3 of the UNCRPD.
The minister last night highlighted misinformation around the bill, yet did not
involve the community, and proper consultation would likely have gone a long
way to avoid this.
My greatest concern is that this bill changes the fundamental relationship
between disabled people, their families, and the state.
That's not misinformation. That's due to the wording in primary
legislation.
For decades, disability support has recognized that while families very
often provide love, care, and support, disabled people
have rights in their own right based on their
need. This bill shifts that starting point.
It says responsibility rests first with family and whānau.
But I ask the committee to think about what that means in practice.
It means that aging parents or indeed any potential
tenuous relative deemed appropriate, whatever that might
mean, wondering how long they will be expected to continue providing
care to a disabled person through the lifespan, likely ahead of
their own needs, present or future, or that of any other children they
may also be providing for. It means disabled adults who want the
same things as everyone else, such as independence, privacy,
relationships, employment, and participation in their
communities, potentially being forced into reliance on family,
or cut out of societal participation because support
is no longer guaranteed.
Article 19 of the UNCRPD recognizes the right of disabled
people to live independently and be included in the community.
It is not a right that expires because someone has parents, siblings,
children, or extended whānau.
Article 28 of the UNCRPD recognizes the right of disabled
people to social protection and disability-related
assistance, and this should be based on need, not financial
assets, to avoid limiting access to support that are
necessary to realize that right.
And while nothing changes today or immediately, this bill clearly signals
a change that could happen any time once primary and later
secondary legislation is passed.
And our second major concern is the extraordinary power this bill
gives to ministerial programs, which, by the way, is a terrible term that's been
communicated. A lot of the information that would
provide clarity and certainty to our community, such as
eligibility, availability of supports, and at what point
income or assets are taken into account, is not in the DSS
primary legislation, but relegated to secondary legislation
that could be up to three years away.
That does not provide stability and security.
This bill has very few safeguards.
It contains no requirement to properly consult disabled people before
major program changes are made. It contains no meaningful protections
for support people currently rely on.
And it allows significant decisions to be made without the deeper level of
parliamentary scrutiny that changes of this magnitude deserve and should
be subject to because secondary legislation is not as strong
or as clear as primary legislation.
Secondary legislation should not be a substitute for primary legislation.
In the past, I've had officials deny rights simply on the basis that
they were not specified in primary legislation.
Our third concern is the absence of an independent appeals and complaints
mechanism. If a disabled person believes a decision is wrong,
unfair, harmful, there's no clear independent pathway in
this legislation to challenge it.
If the bill proceeds, we believe that there are several minimum changes
required. Clause 8 should be removed.
Income and asset testing provisions should be removed or at the very least
identified where and when they would be applied.
Eligibility and funding protections should be placed in primary legislation for
clarity, certainty, and security.
An independent appeals and complaints mechanism should be included in
primary legislation itself,
and there should be mandatory consultation with disabled people before
significant rule changes are made under secondary legislation.
Good disability legislation ensures universal
accessibility, promotes self-determination, safeguards
rights, and aligns with international frameworks.
This bill, as it's currently drafted, risks moving in the opposite
direction. Thank you for your time, and I welcome any questions
you might have.
Does anyone have a
question?
She has the next one as well. Did she say, Dana?
Yes. Yes.
Be happy to go to the next one.
I think we'll go to the next one. You're delivering the next one.
Yeah. Sure.
And then perhaps if there's a question, we'll ask questions then.
Yep, thank you.
So today I am
here on behalf of Viz Able, and I think I might have a colleague
online.
Leo McIntyre, if he's there, will be online.
I'm speaking on behalf of Viz Able, which is a disabled-led collective of
tangata fakatanga Māori, deaf and disabled people working
in the field of disability rights, safeguarding, and the
prevention of violence, abuse, and neglect affecting disabled people.
We will focus on our key concerns and the changes that we believe are
necessary. So our biggest concern is simple, that this bill will
place disabled people and their families at greater risk of harm.
As a safeguarding organization, we see every day the pressures faced by
disabled people, carers, and families.
Many are already stretched emotionally, physically, and financially.
Yet this bill introduces a fundamental shift in responsibility
Because Clause 8 states that responsibility for the care of disabled people
rests in the first instance with family.
And that assumption concerns us deeply.
Because when disability enters a family's life, families themselves often
need support. They are not an unlimited resource.
The bill assumes family and community support will be available without
asking whether it exists, whether it is sustainable, or what
happens when it breaks down, and without defining appropriate.
From a safeguarding perspective, that is dangerous.
When families are expected to absorb increasing caring responsibilities
without adequate support, pressure increases and the risk of
neglect, abuse, and family harm also increases.
And our second concern is the concentration of power within ministerial
programs or secondary legislation.
The bill enables the minister to determine eligibility, funding, and support
arrangements through rules that can be changed without meaningful consultation with
disabled people. The principle of nothing about us without
us is a foundation of disability rights.
This bill moves in the opposite direction.
It creates a framework where decisions with profound consequences for
disabled people's lives can be made without their participation and with
limited public scrutiny.
But our most serious and third concern is what the bill does
to access to justice. As a safeguarding organization, we know
that rights only matter if people can enforce them.
The schedule to this bill prevents certain complaints from being made,
prevents some existing complaints from progressing.
It extinguishes some proceedings already before courts and tribunals
and bars some future proceedings altogether.
This bill does not simply change the law going forward.
It reaches into existing complaints and proceedings and closes doors that
people are already trying to walk through.
For disabled people, independent complaints, processes, tribunals,
courts, the Human Rights Commission, and Health and Disability
Commissioner are not optional extras.
They are often the only protection available when things go wrong.
Removing independent avenues for redress, while at the same time increasing
ministerial power, is deeply troubling.
At the very least, Parliament should not proceed with legislation that
extinguishes existing rights and remedies before a replacement
complaints and appeals framework is in place.
The bill acknowledges that these mechanisms are being deferred to a later phase,
yet protections are being weakened now.
That leaves disabled people exposed in the meantime.
Rights without remedies are not meaningful rights at all.
For these reasons, Bizzable opposes the bill.
If the committee nevertheless decides to proceed, we believe several
changes are essential. Delete Clause 8.
Amend Clause 10 to require meaningful public consultation before
program changes are made in secondary legislation.
Remove income-based and asset-based eligibility
criteria. Preserve access to independent complaints,
review tribunal, and court processes.
And we'd like to finish with this.
The measure of a disability support system is how well it protects people when they
are vulnerable. Good legislation strengthens safeguards,
accountability, and rights. And in our view, this bill weakens all
three.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you. Joanne, I have a question if anyone has
one. My question is,
the minister has agreed that there needs to
be good consultation in the secondary legislation
development.
I'm just interested to know from you what that looks like.
What does good consultation look like in that secondary legislation
timeframe?
For me, at the start, it means consulting with disabled people and their
representative organizations from the beginning.
It feels like this is being done halfway through.
I think that that's a mistake. It should be done much earlier.
It should be available around the motto.
Disabled people and their families can often struggle to get
to centralized places if you only hold such
consultations in the city.
Mm-hmm.
I think about rural communities. I think about people
who just struggle to leave home when you've got disabled children.
So I think good consultation means making those
consultative frameworks available wherever people might live
and to all disabled people and their families.
Mm.
Thank you so much. We have reached our-- You've heard the buzzer go.
So thank you so much for your time and for your very thoughtful
submissions on the two
organizations. It's been great to have you here today.
Thank you.
Excuse me.
Thanks,
Joanne.
Okay.
All right. Te Kahui
Tiki Tangata Human Rights Commission is next online
with
us.
Yes, there we are.
Kia ora. How are you today?
Frances, yes?
Yep.
You are-
Kia ora
... Frances N. Prudence. Welcome to the committee.
You have five minutes. I'm just going to set my little buzzer.
Please do use that as you see fit, and
we look forward to hearing your submission.
Kia ora koutou. Thank you for this opportunity to expand on some of our
written submission,
which we will take as read. You've heard from many disabled
people and whanau on this bill, and their submissions echo what I've heard
in my engagements.
In the context of my statutory role and the Commission's mandate as New Zealand's
National Human Rights Institution, I'd like to speak to two
concerns today.
First, the responsibility of the state as the primary duty
bearer to progressively realize disabled people's rights, and
second, denial of access to justice.
When ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the
government agreed to act as the primary duty bearer.
The principle of progressive realization imposes a duty on the
state to continually improve the enjoyment of rights by
disabled people, including rights to dignity, autonomy,
and being included in the community.
Disabled people and whanau have advocated for many years, supported by
court decisions, for a disability support framework that is not
opaque, inequitable,
or one size fits all. This bill presents another step in the
wrong direction.
Instead of strengthening and clarifying access to supports to
facilitate rights, it does the opposite.
By reducing state responsibility to an unspecified
contribution, it shifts this responsibility onto
families. Families, which the statistics show are
consistently some of the hardest hit by material
hardship.
The state has an obligation to ensure active participation by
disabled people and their whanau in decisions affecting
them. This is not only crucial to upholding
human rights, but also for ensuring that legislation and
policy is fit for purpose for those it is intended to
serve.
Yet this bill has been introduced with no such consultation and
subject to a tight deadline for submissions.
This is wholly inadequate from both a human rights and operational
perspective.
While diluting state responsibility on the one hand, the
bill also concentrates the power of the state and the
minister on the other, enabling broad discretion over
funding decisions and the ability to means test recipients
without providing any guaranteed minimum
entitlements. This is particularly concerning as it
signals a move towards a welfare-type model where
rights can be chipped away at over time.
This bill creates neither certainty nor fairness.
It positions disabled people as costs to be managed rather than as
active rights holders and valued citizens.
Neither the process or the content of the bill
meet the Te Tiriti or human rights standards of active
participation required for such legislation.
Access to justice. Through overturning a Supreme Court
decision, extinguishing existing claims, and banning all future
claims of discrimination or employment-related breaches,
this bill presents an affront to the right to justice for disabled people
and their whanau. It is inconsistent with the New Zealand
BORA and the right to non-discrimination affirmed under
domestic and international law.
It has been made with unnecessary haste based on an
explicit lack of data to justify such extreme measures.
The Supreme Court, and many other courts before it, have continually
signaled deep flaws in the DSS system.
This bill only deepens those flaws by entrenching discriminatory
treatment of disabled people and their whanau and taking away
their rights to challenge such treatment.
While we recommend that this bill does not proceed at all,
should it do so, I urge the committee to recommend
that it gives explicit effect to the rights secured under
Te Tiriti and the convention, particularly
rights to active participation and equity.
That it clarifies that any support provided by families must be
voluntary and complementary, not a substitute for
state support.
And that adequate minimum entitlements are clearly
legislated at this initial framework level for both
disabled people and their carers to protect against
material hardship caused by persistently inadequate
legal protections, aggravated by
the denial of their rights to justice through this bill.
Kia ora.
Thank you very much, Prue, for your submission.
We have ... Hmm, there you go. There's the bell.
We have run out of time for questions, I'm sorry, but I think you
made your case very clearly, and I think the themes are
consistent with what we've been hearing from other submitters too.
So thank you very much and for putting the time in and for appearing
today.
Thank you. Happy to provide any further advice. Kia ora.
Thank you.
Okay. We now welcome Alex Ho.
Alex is at the back. If you'd like to come to the table, Alex.
Can I show these to the select committee, if possible?
What I have here is a six-year-old laptop, and
what I have
on me is a,
if I remember,
also a four-year-old iPad.
And
today my
submission is on the Disability Support Services Bill, and it's in
regards to the flexible funding.
Sure.
My concern is that if it's on the-
Let me just, one second, Alex. Let me just
say, you've got five minutes to speak. Take your time.
You've got plenty of time, and
if there's time for a question at the end, we will do that.
Otherwise, you use the time as you see fit, okay?
Okay.
Okay, currently the flexible funding for the purchase of
laptops, tablets, and mobile phones is one-off only
on the disability support services website, and it cites the
limit
as only $1,500. That is not
enough for a new laptop because
the $1,500 only permits the disabled person
to buy a low-end laptop, tablet, or phone, which
if they need to upgrade further down the line, it's not possible to
upgrade an iPad or phone, and they may have no
choice but to replace it. And the same
applies with a laptop. You can only upgrade the memory and storage
device only. Upgrading them can also cause
hardship as well due to costs and
et cetera.
Another thing is that the manufacturers can pull
support for the iPad or
laptop or tablet as well, like what Apple
did
a few weeks ago with certain models of the iPad and iMac.
And
it can happen with operating systems as well.
Microsoft can choose to pull support for Windows 10 or
11 within 10 years. So
what I'm saying is the $1,500 limit needs
review, and also it shouldn't be a one-off anymore.
It's an ongoing cost,
and it should cover repairs as well if needed.
Because, for example,
my iPad has a liquid chipped screen.
Repairing screens are not cheap at all.
Mm.
Same can be said with laptops and phones as well.
So with the disability funding, I
think that needs to be looked at when it comes to laptops, phones, and
tablets. And usually when it comes to new laptops, they're
now in the 5,000 or even $4,000 mark.
Mm.
And that shortfall when, for example, a disabled person wants to
buy a $4,000 or $5,000 laptop, they've got a shortfall
of 2,500 or 3,500. Same thing with
Apple iPads and phones as well. That's all I have to
say.
Okay.
Any questions the committee would like to ask?
Thank you, Alex. Has anyone got a question?
Just for clarification, so what you're saying is that in the flexible funding,
you're only able to spend $1,500 of it
on hardware like laptops or-
Yeah
... iPads?
So for example, if I needed something with more storage and more memory,
if I applied to a new computer with graphics processor such
as RTX 5050 or 5070 from
NVIDIA, I still got a shortfall of 3,500 or-
Mm
... 4,000.
Mm.
Same thing
with iPads with one to two terabytes worth of space.
Apple usually sells them at 4,900
on the internet store, or
at PB Tech you might be able to get it for 4,400, but you've still got
a shortfall of 2,900.
Mm.
Okay.
So that may cause considerable stress for people with
disabilities or-
Mm. And do you use it all the time for-
I use it, my one is a multipurpose.
Yes.
If I need it for documents or work or
gaming because it functions as work and entertainment.
Mm.
I don't use a desktop anymore because it's just too
heavy, and you can't just carry it around everywhere.
So
between a desktop and laptop, a desktop is not possible because it's just way
too heavy.
Mm.
But the
pros
between a desktop is that I can swap the parts out anytime I need.
But a laptop, you just can't do that.
Right.
For example, if-
Yeah
... with laptops you can upgrade the motherboard, you can upgrade the
memory, you can upgrade the storage.
But if the parts are really aging-
Mm-hmm
... then it becomes a question, is it still
worth it to upgrade or change to another
computer? You just can't
swap the graphics processor over.
Mm-hmm.
Okay.
Yeah.
Look, thank you very much. Anyone else? Nope?
I'm very clear, Sebastian. Thank you. Thank you.
It's a very good point you make, and we'll certainly make sure it gets passed on.
Okay.
Thank you for coming today.
Thank you.
It's nice to see you and to meet you.
Thank you. Have a nice afternoon, everyone.
You too.
Thank you.
Law Society online? Yes.
Here we go. Scott.
Welcome, Scott.
New Zealand Law Society, Te Kāhui Turi o Aotearoa.
You have five minutes with us. Yes, so
use that time as you see fit. You can assume that your
submission has been read by the committee, and you can
expand on that or leave time for questions if there are any at the end.
Over to you.
Thank you. I'm joined online by my colleague, Andrew Shaw, who's a
managing partner at Lane Neve, and both of us sit on two of the Law
Society's law reform committees.
Because we do have those five minutes, our proposal was really just to take
any questions that you had on the submission.
I recognize there's quite a lot of some- ...
technical legal points in there. The one thing we did want to
stress, though, not just because of this bill, but more broadly, is that we are
really concerned by the
quality of the MOJ advice on the BORA.
It's a lot lower than what we've seen across a wide variety
of bills, particularly about the approach that says
that if there's fiscal cost to the Crown- That in and of
itself justifies overriding the Bill of Rights Act.
We don't think that's right, but more to the point, we think that you should expect
slightly higher standards of borough vetting from officials.
But other than that, we're happy to take questions, or there's a few points in the
submission I can talk to you about, if that's helpful.
I think maybe if you could just make, briefly, your main points that you
want to get across. If there are particular...
Your submission is very fulsome, but perhaps there are a couple of things that you
want to specifically highlight.
So I think the first point might be helpful for you,
which we talk about at 4.12 in the footnote there, is that
officials have slightly skipped over the approach to
suppressing existing court proceedings, which I heard the Human Rights Commission
raising as well.
Your colleagues in the Finance and Expenditure Select Committee took a different
approach to the ANZ class action, which you might have seen some media about,
where they allowed that particular court action to continue,
but barred future court actions. We're a bit surprised that
the officials haven't considered that.
There's very little analysis or explanation as to why some
kind of middle ground wasn't considered, and we think you should perhaps ask
some questions of officials about that.
Okay.
The next thing we talk about at 6.4,
apologies, a slight personal bugbear of mine, is that there's quite an
important issue when the government decides to exempt itself from the same kinds
of laws and rules that apply to private people.
This being the idea that the Crown is no longer going to be bound by
the Minimum Wage Act in these circumstances.
There's very deep, long-standing constitutional rules about the basic
idea that you should be able to litigate against the Crown on the same
terms as if they were a private party, all other things being equal.
And to say that private employers have to pay carers the minimum wage, but the
Crown doesn't necessarily have to do that, raises some quite significant
issues, which we don't think have been really at all explored or discussed by
officials. Before I go any further, though, I'm sure my colleague might have one or
two things to contribute from his perspective.
Sure.
Yes. Thank you, Scott. Yeah, the concern for me is the lack of
consultation with MB, specifically during the
transitional period, where they seem to have been a little bit
roughshod over the concept of who is the employer during that
period.
Simply because
many of the disabled people do not have the capability or the
capacity to be an employer. So I would have thought further
consultation with MB would have cleared up some of those issues.
And on the health and safety perspective, again,
there doesn't seem to have been significant consultation,
perhaps with WorkSafe, to determine some
complex issues there, specifically around who is
the PCBU. Are they exempt because of the
provisions of the current act? And secondly, in
terms of third parties coming in and having an
influence on a workplace, such as MSD or the Ministry
for Disabled People. Thank you.
Sure. Okay. So just a question from me.
Is it your view that there does need to be some kind
of codifying of the current system in some respect
because there isn't any legislation that guides the disability support sector at
the moment?
Yes.
So you agree with that fundamentally?
Yes, I do. Yeah.
But you don't agree with how it's being done?
No, because it's just a lack of consultation and a lack of thought about the
consequences of both an employer's obligation, if it is a
disabled person, and the health and safety implications in the
workplace, where there could be quite critical risks with a disabled
person.
A lot of the detail, the devil is in the detail in these situations.
Things like choosing to minimize the Crown's fiscal risk by saying,
"We don't think the Crown should have to pay the minimum wage," is a big policy
decision with quite significant legal implications.
Right.
Even if you might agree potentially with the premise about whether or
not there needs to be a broader codification of the law.
Okay.
All right. And just one further quick one.
The different layers between the primary and the secondary legislation, what is
your view on
how those are working together in the proposed bill?
Do you want me to answer that, Andrew?
Go on, Scott. Thank you.
Look, it's always hard to know exactly how secondary legislation will be
designed before you've seen it.
As I understand the proposals, particularly from the Bill of Rights
perspective, there's a lot of belief that the minister will be
designing the secondary legislation in a
rights-consistent manner. Putting aside the broader concerns that
we've had about that, I think I heard you saying to some submitters earlier
that during that process, consultation will be really, really important.
I'd probably endorse that view. It is just what that looks
like in practice will obviously make a big difference to the kind of concerns we
might have.
You probably already know this from officials have told you, but ultimately, the
minister's still going to need to ensure that the bill
is lawful according to the various constraints like the Bill of Rights Act.
Yeah.
And if the bill is designed in such a way as to create
conflict between those rights in a primary legislative stage, the minister might
have the best of intentions but is constrained by the bill to act in a way that's
not so lawful, or at least not lawful as opposed to those other rights,
but lawful under this particular bill.
Yeah. Okay. That's a good point. I'm sorry, I could probably ask you
a million more questions, but I've run out of time.
And I do really appreciate the time you've given us today, and I'm sure you'll
follow it with interest. And we will
perhaps discuss again one day. But thank you for coming, and thank you for your
submission.
Thank you.
I haven't done very well with my timing, have I?
No, you're doing-
All right. Access to Health and Disability Services Research Group.
Let's go. Who have we got? Tara, is that right?
Kia ora. That's right. Dr. Tara Officer here,
and thanks for having me. Do you want to give your five minutes feel, or do you
want me to get started?
Away you go.
So I'm speaking on behalf of a collective of researchers who work
across disability studies, health equity, social
policy, and health services access and delivery research in
Aotearoa. Our group has professional clinical expertise and
lived experience of disability.
And I think the number one thing for us,
and I'm going to break it down into three things in a sec, but the number one thing
is to think about this bill as not a minor administrative change.
This affects not only the 851,000 New
Zealanders living with disabilities,
and 60% of those are reporting at least one unmet need already.
It actually affects the whole of Aotearoa, and this context really matters
because this legislation will shape our access to security, independence,
support, and participation for a large and diverse part of our
population and their whanau.
As a result, we strongly oppose the bill in its current form,
and our arguments are around three main concerns.
The first one is what you've heard from almost every person here, the shifting of
responsibility for disability support away from the state and onto
whanau, friends, and formal carers.
This has a direct impact on the well-being of
these people. It also directs decision-makers to consider
support availability from families,
communities, personal resources, and other public sources before
disability support is provided.
While family and whanau support is often important, it must be freely
given and supplementary to public support, not presumed as a
substitute. Families differ in their ability to provide care.
They may be managing poverty, employment,
distance, their own health needs, family violence, or inadequate
housing support, for example.
Some
disabled people do not have access to family networks that are either safe,
there at all, stable,
reliable. And treating family capacity as a
resource to be drawn on before public support risks increasing
unpaid care, reducing workforce participation, creating long-term
financial insecurity. And these effects, as we know, are
likely to fall disproportionately on women, including disabled women,
who often carry much of the unpaid care
work.
This bill is also creating more general anxiety.
Many families have spent years planning for their disabled child's
future. They need certainty that support will remain
available when family circumstances change, when parents age, when
carers become unwell, or care is no longer sustainable.
Our second concern is the bill's failure to establish disability support
as a clear rights-based responsibility of the state.
In the bill, access depends on whether someone is assessed as eligible under
future disability support services funding policy.
This raises a fundamental question: who can access support?
And that question is left to the whims of ministerial policy.
The bill also permits programs to consider disability type or cause,
age, living arrangements, income, assets, and predicted future needs, but this
will create a pathway for tightening eligibility, means testing, for
example. We're not saying that every future change will lead to
this, but what we are saying is that the bill makes these changes
easier to introduce. Any future changes to
eligibility, funding, or cost structure should be subject to the
full democratic scrutiny and transparency.
So our third concern surrounds the lack of co-design and
accountability.
So the bill gives broad powers to make decisions and programs determining
eligibility, allocation, payments,
et cetera. But it does not require meaningful co-design with the disability
sector.
It also does not establish rights to written reasons,
independent reviews, or safeguarding.
Those protections should not be deferred to a later phase.
They should be present before substantial new powers are exercised.
Our recommendations are therefore straightforward. The bill should be paused.
It should be substantially redesigned through genuine co-design
with disabled people, whanau, Tangata Whenua Maori, and
the disability sector.
Any revised bill should establish disability support as a rights-based
state responsibility. It should remove the presumption that families
must provide support first. It should embed enabling good lives
principles, including autonomy, choice, dignity, and supported
decision-making. It should align explicitly with the United
Nations Conventions on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities. It should require transparent consultation
for changes to eligibility, funding, and cost structures.
Rights to assessment should be provided,
and it should retain disabled people's ability to direct and arrange their own
support.
In closing, this bill is not neutral.
It risks making disabled people and their families carry the consequences of
constrained public provision, thereby affecting not just the disabled
person and their family, but society as a whole. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Tara. Look, sadly, we don't have time for questions, but
you make a very good case, and thank you for the time and effort you've put in to
being here today.
Kia ora.
Kia ora. Thank you.
All right.
Parents of Vision Impaired NZ.
Here we go.
Tena koutou katoa.
Tena koutou.
William McGrath. I'm the deputy chair for Parents of Vision Impaired New
Zealand Incorporated.
Thank you for the time to talk to committee to tautoko our submission about the
bill.
Parents of Vision Impaired is a nationwide charity that supports parents
and caregivers of hundreds of New Zealand's blind, low vision,
deaf blind, and vision impaired children.
We provide community information, advocacy, and a platform for
whanau whose voices are often overlooked in policy decisions that affect their
daily lives. And,
this is
one such example.
Our submission supports the idea of having a clear legislative
framework for disability support services.
Mm-hmm.
We agree that the system needs certainty,
consistency,
proper foundations. But we cannot support the
process that has brought us to this bill.
The bill was developed clearly without meaningful consultation.
You've heard quite a bit from many of our fellow submitters today about this.
The regulatory impact statement itself acknowledges this.
Disabled people, carers in organizations like ours were not involved in
shaping these proposals before they were introduced.
It came kind of out of blind sight.
And we've already heard about
the breaches to the UNCRPD, where we as a signatory
state agreed we wouldn't make changes that would affect disabled people without
fully involving them first.
While we appreciate the select committee process has been expanded a little
bit,
it's still the only opportunity for disabled people, their whanau, and
organizations to support them to have a say.
And that's not good enough for legislation that will fundamentally reshape their
lives. My son is six. He's vision impaired, and yet
these changes, if implemented, will affect him when he's 60.
He's also Māori, and Māori are disproportionately represented in DSS.
Māori are carers, are more likely to be providing funded care,
and yet the bill only contains token references to Te Tiriti.
It provides no substance on its impact to tangata
whaikaha Māori.
There's an assumption that whanau, hapū, iwi,
hapori will just simply pick up the additional
responsibilities.
But when we consider that urban Māori, many urban Māori might not have those
connections or resources, and we're expecting them to become self-sufficient
without resourcing them, and that's not partnership. That is abdication.
You've heard about the secondary legislation piece.
This bill does allow major decisions like
eligibility rules, income testing, asset testing to be set down by ministerial
notice and without parliamentary scrutiny.
And although Minister Upston has recently said she doesn't intend to
act on this to provide harm,
that's not the case.
In the end, the bill's not just for this minister, it's for future
ministers with unknown agendas. Disabled people and
their carers deserve certainty, not a system where their rights can be
changed at any time without due consultation.
Clause 8 prioritizes family resources before DSS funding,
and this assumes all families have the capacity, time, resources to provide
that care, and many do not already.
Family carers already take on responsibilities that most parents never face.
Managing personal cares for adult children, providing complex medical support,
and sacrificing their careers and retirement savings.
Removing those employment protections and limiting minimum wage entitlements during
transition, for instance, is a slap in the face for all of them.
If carers burn out, and many will, the burden will be on the state
elsewhere, in the health system, in the crisis services area,
long-term care. As an example, I'm a parent of a vision impaired
child. My son, Tobias, is six years old.
He's one of five in the country with Joubert syndrome, and it's rendered him blind,
developmentally delayed, non-verbal, and autistic.
And we love him dearly,
but caring for him is a significant challenge. It is mentally draining.
It's really disruptive. And respite is already
hard enough to come by as it is for us, but this bill potentially threatens our
ability to obtain it as it is. Disability can affect any one of
us at any time, and we don't means test access
to other services for those who aren't disabled.
We don't means test access to state schools, public hospitals, or ACC, and
yet we're about to provide the means for
today's minister, next year's minister, whoever, to
means test access to disability support.
Needs-based support is a cornerstone of dignity, equity,
and participation. And it's because of that, we recommend the
committee recommend substantial amendments.
The framework's absolutely needed, we agree, but it needs to be co-designed
with disabled people right from the start. It needs to uphold human rights.
It needs to honor Te Tiriti. It needs to protect carers and
provide certainty for the future. Ngā mihi nui.
I'm happy to take questions.
Well, you finished right on the bell.
Woo. Thank you.
Well done. Well done. Look, I think
we're pretty clear about your views and where you're standing.
Your submission is very clear too.
So I want to thank you for your time, and we won't have time for a
question, sadly. But-
Yeah, no problem.
I think we got the message, William. Yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
All right. We will move to Paul Serenck.
Paul is online. He's not got his camera on.
I think he's unmuted, so you can-
Okay, Paul. If you can hear us, if you don't want to turn your camera on, that's
totally fine. If you do, you can do that now, otherwise you can talk to us.
Oh, there you are.
We can't hear you though, so sadly
And now?
There we go. Now you're on.
Right. I have a face made for radio.
Yes, I'm similar, I'm sure. Look, thank you very much.
You have five minutes. Please do get underway, and we'll use
the time as you see fit.
Right. Hopefully, I won't take five minutes of your time.
I think my submission's quite clear.
It follows along similar lines to most other people.
As an individual who was part of consulting with the minister on
numerous occasions, I'm somewhat embarrassed
that the information I provided, and others, has led
to this bill being proposed in its current form.
Clearly, we weren't concise
enough in our information to the minister if this is the best that we can
do.
I notice that you will see that I
accept, and many people do,
that we need to have a clear legal
foundation for disability support services.
There's no doubt about that. The current systems are just not fit for
purpose anymore. But I can't support this bill in its current state
for the various reasons that are listed in my
submission.
Mm-hmm.
All right?
I'm happy to take questions. I think I've
probably been clear enough of my dissatisfaction.
Okay.
I note here that you talk about the substantive elements of eligibility and
funding in the primary legislation and not left to regulation.
What does that look like for you?
That looks like to me is that, well, I believe Minister Upsall has the
best intentions. If it's not in the primary, it can be at the whim of the
minister.
Now, I know secondary has to go before, and it's
passed, et cetera.
But if anyone who's sitting on the committee could tell me the last time a
paper was put up by a minister that was not voted through,
please do.
I can't, in my living memory, remember when such a circumstance arrived.
So if a minister puts it up, it's generally straight through.
Right? So while that is there, it's
not. Right? It's a sop.
Okay?
Okay.
So, we in the community, disabled community, we want to
know, and we want to have surety about what's happening.
Right? We had a debacle in 2023. We got through
that. A lot of people gave a lot of time, energy, and effort,
and personal information to support the consultation that took
place at that time.
Right?
Mm-hmm.
I don't know of anybody
who contributed at that time that would've expected to see what's
presented in the bill
in its current format.
Okay.
All right. Well, I think that's pretty clear.
Yeah. Well, I hope so.
I've been listening and I've been
following. Every single time,
not every, I would say the
majority of time,
there's a limited time for questions because we are short of time.
Five minutes. I could talk for probably 25 minutes and still bring
up issues, and I could have personal examples. I could have lots of things.
But five minutes isn't enough to contribute, and neither
is the submission time enough to give it what it warrants.
I'm pretty clear. I want it to go back.
I want you to recommend that it goes back out to consultation. End of story.
Right?
Yeah.
I think I signed it off with,
nothing about us without us.
Mm.
Right?
Yes, you did.
All right. And like I said-
Right
... I'm actually embarrassed to have been involved at that earlier stage.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you for your submission. Appreciate your time.
Okay.
Katie
Thomas. Katie and Eddie?
Yes.
Thank you.
Katie.
Kia ora.
Hi, nice to have you with us. You have five minutes with us to
outline your points you want to make.
We have read your submission, but please use the time as you see fit.
Thank you. Eddie may or may not join us. It's right on bath time.
So,
I might be reading by myself, or he might come crashing in.
Just letting you know in advance.
All good. No worries.
Okay.
I'm going to take my written submission as read, just to focus on your questions.
And for those who haven't read it, kia ora.
My name is Katie Thomas. I'm very grateful for the opportunity to speak on
this matter. I'm the face of Neurodiverse Parent Carers for the government's
disability resource, Firstport, a neurodivergent clinician at
ActiveAttunement.com, and I am Cassie the carer on the
Netflix hit Kiwi comedy, "Madam," cast because of my lived
experience as a full-time carer to my own wonderfully
complex twin and his young carer brother.
The change I ask is that this bill not proceed, or at least not in
its current form. I call on the committee to consider rights before
rationing, well-being before bureaucracy, continuity of
care, external accountability, flexible support, and the
protections of carers without legislating family.
If it does proceed, Clause 8 and the families first principle must
be removed entirely because families are already first.
Whanau are the frontline and the last rights.
We're doing the work before the diagnosis, all day, all night,
through seizures and ventilators, drug weans and intubations, school
exclusions or excursions, every mental health crisis.
We're doing the quiet daily work no spreadsheet could ever capture
the quality of.
And there is a clear moral and legal distinction between
sustainability and our contributions that shifts
our rights-based framework into an optional welfare system.
Legally mandated, you would taint love to liability,
support to substitution, consent to resentment, and it exceeds
funding thresholds. It cuts to the core of identity
politics, what this country and all Kiwis
stand for, and it changes your role from guarantor of
rights to residual fund of last resort.
And we must believe in the humanity of government,
else you be replaced by algorithm and we, the numbers
in an equation to subtract.
The means testing and scope for secondary legislation must be
removed. With means testing in place for DSS,
I would never have been able to safely leave the family home during a
high-conflict separation. This is not a funding issue,
this is a safety issue.
Ergo, the bill must preserve external complaints pathways.
They are what make the system safe, clear and
consistent, and the government worthy of trust broken on the back
of March 1824.
My biggest concern is that this bill appears to limit Crown
liability while expanding family responsibility
infinitively, and that is a dangerous imbalance.
To your final question, what is my solution?
Make this bill more aspirational than numerical.
The scale of community response, the volume, and the urgency
is no resistance to reform. I believe it is the evidence that
the disability community still believes this process can be
corrected, that there is hope.
There is also grave concern.
A bill that affects the most disabled people in Aotearoa cannot carry
democratic legitimacy if the most affected go rushed,
unheard, or treated as a fiscal risk to be managed.
Kiwis like to believe that we give people a fair go, and this bill as
drafted does not feel like a fair go.
But it could be.
It could be the first foundation of disabled human rights
to entitle them to dignity, safety, autonomy, participation,
continuity of care, and ordinary life.
We carers matter, not because we can be endlessly relied
upon, but because we're human beings whose well-being also
sustains the system, sustain this country.
And that is a more aspirational version of this bill, and I believe it is still
available to you. I want to finish with hope.
I want to tell you about my disabled son, Eddie,
how he is cherished,
how his class cheers when he's well enough for school.
How he is his little brother's, and I quote, "Bestest best friend
and the best brother in the whole world," and I agree.
How his laugh lights up the room. How his life and cares have
stretched me, humbled me, and grown me into
a better version of myself.
How he brings out the best in everyone who truly sees him, and today I hope he
brings out the best in this committee too.
Please do not let this bill become a cost-saving instrument New Zealand
later has to apologize for. Let it become
something better. Let it become a rights-based foundation
for disability support that disabled people, whanau, carers,
and all of you ministers can be proud to build upon.
Please do not conflate our unconditional love for
unlimited capacity.
Whanau will always be part of the answer, but we cannot be the place
where the Crown's obligations go to disappear.
I hope I've left enough time to answer any questions you might have.
Look, I'm sorry, we are out of time, but I do want
to just pay tribute to you and the work you do
with your family, and what a remarkable
story you told us about Eddie. And I'm sorry we
didn't get to meet Eddie this time, but he-
Yeah. Just the time of night.
Yeah. It's the witching hour, isn't it?
Yes, it is.
Yeah.
But-
But look, thank you so much for your time, and thank you for your very clear and
heartfelt submission. It's been wonderful to hear from you.
Thank you. Thank you very much for the opportunity.
Thank you.
Cheers.
Okay, so the committee's now moving into private se-